docs: narrow the localization page to grounded claims (#729)
Promptless/docs: src/content/docs/docs/get-the-most-out/localization.mdx

---
title: Keep translated docs current
description: Pair a trigger on your source-language directory with written instructions so Promptless drafts translated updates when your source docs change
slug: docs/get-the-most-out/localization
type: guide
tags:
  - get-the-most-out
  - guide
timestamp: "2026-07-31T00:00:00Z"
sidebar:
  hidden: false
  order: 32
  label: Keep translations current
---

import { Aside, Steps } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

When your docs ship in more than one language, the translated pages are the first to fall behind whenever source content changes. Most teams author in one language — commonly English — and mirror it into the others. This page applies the trigger-plus-instructions pattern to that job: you point a trigger at the directory you author in, and Promptless drafts translated updates for the rest of your documentation.

<Aside type="note">

>   There is no localization setting in Promptless. You assemble this from two ingredients — a **trigger** that decides when Promptless runs, and a **workflow written as instructions** that describes what it does — the same pattern documented for [custom tasks](/docs/get-the-most-out/teach-promptless-a-custom-task).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  There are no native localization settings in Promptless. You assemble this from two ingredients — a **trigger** that decides when Promptless runs, and a **workflow written as instructions** that describes what it does — the same pattern documented for [custom tasks](/docs/get-the-most-out/teach-promptless-a-custom-task).
```

</Aside>

## Pair a trigger with translation instructions

<Steps>

>   1. **Scope a trigger to your source-language directory.** On the [Configuration page](https://app.gopromptless.ai/configuration), open the **Triggers** tab, choose **Add a trigger**, and pick **GitHub commits**. A [commit trigger](/docs/connect/triggers/github-commits) runs when new commits are pushed to a branch, and it's the only trigger type that supports auto-merge. Expand **More filters (optional)**, then under **Only when files in these folders change** enter the path you author in, such as `docs/en`, and press Enter to add it. Only commits that contain changes to those folders trigger documentation updates, so a commit touching just the translated directories doesn't match.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1. **Scope a trigger to your source-language directory.** On the [Configuration page](https://app.gopromptless.ai/configuration), open the **Triggers** tab, choose **Add a trigger**, and pick **GitHub commits**. A [commit trigger](/docs/connect/triggers/github-commits) runs when new commits are pushed to a branch, regardless of whether those commits were in PRs. Expand **More filters (optional)**, then under **Only when files in these folders change** enter the path you author in, such as `docs/en`, and press **Enter** to add it. Only commits that contain changes to those folders trigger documentation updates, so a commit touching just the translated directories doesn't match.
```

>   2. **Write the translation instructions in `PROMPTLESS.md`.** The trigger decides when Promptless runs; the instructions are the convention you write for what it does. `PROMPTLESS.md` lives in your [Agent Knowledge Base](/docs/get-the-most-out/agent-knowledge-base) and is loaded into the agent's instructions on every run, so a rule you record there is visible every time. Name the directory you author in, the directories to update, and any terms to leave in the source language — for example, "`docs/en` is the source. Mirror changes into `docs/es` and `docs/ja`, and keep product names untranslated." See [Teach Promptless a custom task](/docs/get-the-most-out/teach-promptless-a-custom-task) for the "If, then" hook format and where longer workflows live.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  2. **Write the translation instructions in `PROMPTLESS.md`.** The trigger decides when Promptless runs, but the instructions are your preferences for how Promptless should handle those localization tasks. `PROMPTLESS.md` lives in your [Agent Knowledge Base](/docs/get-the-most-out/agent-knowledge-base) and is loaded into the agent's instructions on every run, so a rule you record there is visible every time. Name the directory you author in, the directories to update, and any terms to leave in the source language. For example, "`docs/en` is the documentation source directory. Localize changes into `docs/es` and `docs/ja`, and keep product names untranslated." See [Teach Promptless a custom task](/docs/get-the-most-out/teach-promptless-a-custom-task) for the "If, then" hook format and where longer workflows live.
```

  3. **Review the drafted updates.** Promptless opens a suggestion with the translated changes. Review and publish it the way you review any other suggestion.
</Steps>

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Teach translation conventions with feedback

Plan to refine your translation instructions across the first few suggestions rather than landing them on the first run, especially when you maintain several target languages or are catching up a stale backlog. Product names, terms of art, and phrases you deliberately leave untranslated need to come out the same way every time. When you correct a translation, [teach the convention with feedback](/docs/tune/teaching-conventions) and check **Remember this feedback for future suggestions** so it shapes what Promptless proposes next time, not just this once. Promptless records what it learns — which terms stay in the source language, or how a feature name is rendered — in your Agent Knowledge Base.

## Catch up translations that are already behind

The trigger-plus-instructions pattern is event-driven: it acts on new commits and does not retroactively scan pages that are already out of date. For one-time, corpus-wide work, use [Deep Analysis](/docs/get-the-most-out/pay-down-docs-debt), which takes free-text instructions and returns a coordinated set of suggestions. Once you're current, new commits to your source-language directory start a run as usual.

```

## Publish translated updates automatically

> Start with review, and turn automation on once you trust the output. On the **Policies** tab of the [Configuration page](https://app.gopromptless.ai/configuration), add a rule scoped to your translation trigger and turn on both **Open a pull request automatically** and **Merge the pull request automatically**. [Auto-merge](/docs/connect/triggers/github-commits#auto-merge-mode) requires automatic PR creation to also be enabled, and it's available only for GitHub commit triggers. A policy rule scopes to a single trigger, so full automation stays where you want it. With the [GitHub (read-only) app](/docs/reference/integrations/github), which covers public repositories only, Promptless opens PRs from a fork, so confirm the automation behaves the way you expect before you rely on it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start by reviewing localization PRs, but consider turning on auto-merge once you trust the output. On the **Policies** tab of the [Configuration page](https://app.gopromptless.ai/configuration), add a rule scoped to your translation trigger and turn on both **Open a pull request automatically** and **Merge the pull request automatically**. [Auto-merge](/docs/connect/triggers/github-commits#auto-merge-mode) requires automatic PR creation to also be enabled, and it's available only for GitHub commit triggers. A policy rule scopes to a single trigger, so full automation stays where you want it. With the [GitHub (read-only) app](/docs/reference/integrations/github), which covers public repositories only, Promptless opens PRs from a fork, so confirm the automation behaves the way you expect before you rely on it.
```

> ## Teach translation conventions with feedback
> 
> Plan to refine your translation instructions across the first few suggestions rather than landing them on the first run, especially when you maintain several target languages or are catching up a stale backlog. Product names, terms of art, and phrases you deliberately leave untranslated need to come out the same way every time. When you correct a translation, [teach the convention with feedback](/docs/tune/teaching-conventions) and check **Remember this feedback for future suggestions** so it shapes what Promptless proposes next time, not just this once. Promptless records what it learns — which terms stay in the source language, or how a feature name is rendered — in your Agent Knowledge Base.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ## Catch up translations that are already behind
> 
> The trigger-plus-instructions pattern is event-driven: it acts on new commits and does not retroactively scan pages that are already out of date. For one-time, corpus-wide work, use [Deep Analysis](/docs/get-the-most-out/pay-down-docs-debt), which takes free-text instructions and returns a coordinated set of suggestions. Once you're current, new commits to your source-language directory start a run as usual.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Translation management systems

> Promptless drafts translated content based on the instructions you provide. There is no documented integration with a translation management system (TMS) such as Phrase, Crowdin, or Lokalise. If your team runs one and wants Promptless to hand off to it rather than draft the content itself, contact us at [help@gopromptless.ai](mailto\:help@gopromptless.ai) to discuss your requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Promptless localizes content based on the instructions you provide, but there is no integration with a translation management system (TMS) such as Phrase, Crowdin, or Lokalise. If your team runs a TMS and wants Promptless to hand off to it rather than draft the content itself, contact us at [help@gopromptless.ai](mailto\:help@gopromptless.ai) to discuss your requirements.
```
